---
tags: ["architecture", "core"]
---

import Image from "next/image";
import { Callout } from "nextra/components";

# Actor Model

CosmWasm, at its core, is built around the actor model. This prevents some
common pitfalls which, for example, Ethereum smart contracts had to fix over the
years. The issues mostly revolved around [reentrancy issues] where we could, for
example, call out to another contract before finishing the current execution.

<Callout>
  If you are already familiar with the actor model through, for example,
  programming in languages such as Erlang or Elixir, you can skip this page.
</Callout>

While the term "actor model" sounds fancy, it is actually quite simple. Each
contract is an "actor" and _plays_ a role in the system (pun intended).

Each actor has its own state and can only be interacted with via messages. This
means a contract can only interact with the outside world via messages and only
manipulate its own state.

Picture two people living in two houses, each house has a mailbox. If person A
wants to talk to person B, they write a letter, address to to person B, and send
it off. The mailman (or in this case, the chain) will put the letter in person
B's mailbox.

Person B will then read the letter and can choose to write a response, address
it to person A with a note indicating that this is a reply, and send it off once
again.

No direct interaction is happening here, nobody visits each other's house which
would allow them to rummage around in their belongings (state). They simply
exchange messages and put everything the other side needs to know into a
message.

<Image
  src="/actor-model.svg"
  alt="Actor model"
  style={{ marginTop: "1em", marginBottom: "1em" }}
  width={1920}
  height={1080}
/>

As you can see in the simple graphic above, they simply exchange messages
addressed to each other, and the messages reference previous messages if need
be.

But how does that fix reentrancy? In CosmWasm, you can only send out messages at
the end of a contract execution as part of the response. This ensures you have
already written everything to the state, meaning the state can't suddenly change
mid-execution and make your contract exhibit buggy behaviour.

CosmWasm effectively forces you to follow the [CEI pattern (Checks, Effects,
Interactions)] while other similar systems only have this as a "best practice".

[reentrancy issues]:
  https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/smart-contracts/security/#reentrancy
[CEI pattern (Checks, Effects, Interactions)]:
  https://fravoll.github.io/solidity-patterns/checks_effects_interactions.html
